---
layout: page
title: A Rainy Day in New York Review
---

          At a first glance, A Rainy Day in New York is a pleasant romcom with all of Woody Allen’s  signature attributes. Looking deeper, viewers will find overused themes, characters, and general tropes in this film, which seem to hark back to Allen’s last great film, Midnight in Paris. A Rainy Day in New York feels as if some lesser director tried to recreate Midnight in Paris in their own image, and failed.  The film is tired to a degree where even the usually beautiful cinematography of Vittorio Storaro feels dull.  It is the most recent of Allen’s love letters to various cities, this one to Manhattan, but his inability to bring a fresh side to the newest installment of his famed city films is its downfall.  The final punch comes in the film’s delayed release in the US, as a result of renewed attention to Allen’s sexual abuse accusations in 2018, right after the completion of the film.

          The plot centers around two college sweethearts, Gatsby Welles (Timothee Chalamet), and Ashleigh Enright (Elle Fanning).  They attend a small liberal arts school, the fictional Yardley College, and plan a weekend in Manhattan that leads to various misadventures.  Chalamet’s character is a poorly executed nod to Holden Caulfield (Catcher in the Rye), existing in a time where teenagers unironically wear tweed.  His girlfriend, Ashleigh, is an overly peppy journalism major from Arizona, and the plot kicks off with her chance to interview the brilliant yet tortured filmmaker, Roland Pollard (Liev Schreiber). As they venture into the city, the couple spend only a short time together before separating for Ashleigh’s interview.  Gatsby wants to have a fancy weekend to show Ashleigh around his hometown while avoiding one of his socialite mother’s big parties. They both get led down different paths and Ashleigh is sent on a madcap adventure after her experience with Pollard, while Gatsby wanders through the city by himself and encounters various people, most notably, Chan (Selena Gomez).  Chan is the younger sister of one of Gatsby’s old girlfriends, and is introduced in such a fashion that she becomes a love interest.  The resulting love triangle is standard Allen setup, with the same clumsiness with which this film was concocted.
          
          The basic idea of the film seems simple enough, but it all falls apart with  the execution, and the storyline becomes more convoluted with different recycled Allen themes.  The name “Gatsby Welles,” is enough to raise a red flag for viewers, being based off of a combination of Jay Gatsby and Orson Welles’ names. Those intrepid souls who continue watching the film will find that their fears were warranted.  Both Chalamet and Fanning are some of the best actors of their generation, yet even they cannot save Gatsby and Ashleigh.  Seeing either actor in any other film would make apparent that they were instructed to deliver their lines in the traditional Allen way.  Gatsby already embodies a stereotype that is overused, but his accompanying mannerisms make it difficult to watch him.  He almost never makes eye contact with whom he is speaking, and he constantly shrugs and twitches his head, creating the effect of a nervous turtle.  Allen may have gone for Salinger’s Caulfield with Gatsby, but ended up with Gossip Girl’s Dan Humphrey (Penn Badgely).  However, Ashleigh is somehow worse.  Between her peppiness-turned-ditziness, her guileless nature, and her hiccuping when “sexually conflicted,” Ashleigh is, quite simply put, annoying.  Most would find her intolerable, as her giggly persona overtakes any redeeming qualities that could be found.  It is unfortunate that such a talented actor as Fanning falls victim to the Allen stereotype of the shallow woman who only exists for the purpose of a man.
          
          The three main female characters  may all lack depth, but the misogyny of the film extends much further than just that.  The plot revolves around the fact that Ashleigh ‘ditches’ Gatsby for her interview, ruining their day together and leading them to go on their separate adventures.  Ashleigh is villainized for her ambition, and while both parts of the couple are unfaithful, Gatsby is absolved due to his loneliness.  Gatsby being melancholy about going one day without female validation exemplifies Ashleigh’s villain status as well as the misogynistic undertones of the film.  Chan only exists to provide Gatsby the approval that he sought, and Gatsby’s  mother is vilified before we even meet her.  Furthermore, the film is so unoriginal, that viewers can draw direct lines between these shallow stereotypes for women to those in other Allen films.  
          
          In Midnight in Paris, the main character, Gil (Owen Wilson), experiences a similar love triangle to the one featured  in A Rainy Day in New York.  His wife (Rachel McAdams), an unquestionably horrible woman, is fair haired, high voiced and lacks motivation besides her shallow greed. The woman Gil is tempted by (Marion Cotillard), is a husky brunette who understands him. The exact parallels between the Midnight in Paris triangle and this one are too similar to allow that of A Rainy Day in New York to be considered anything new, and further solidify the villain that Ashleigh has been made into.
          
          A Rainy Day in New York was shelved for two years following the wake of backlash against Woody Allen in the US. Amazon broke its four picture deal with Allen, and allowed him to dispose of the fully-finished film as he pleased. Allen ended up brokering several distribution deals with European territories, and the film was subsequently released in those territories, starting with Poland in 2019. When the film was finally released in the US in October of 2020, it was a disappointment.  From the hateable characters to the worn out tropes, A Rainy Day in New York is not worth a watch.
